what you see on screen now is an example
of research
into the health outcomes of a vegan diet
and i say outcomes not benefits for a
reason
new research that vegans would like to
ignore not
all of the findings about the health
benefits of a vegan diet
are positive and not all of them
are impressive and how you respond
to news of this kind will reveal a great
deal
about not only why you're vegan now
but also what your assumptions are
about the future of the movement what
many many people want to believe
is that the health benefits of a vegan
diet
are so positive are so impressive
are so overwhelming that we won't
need to go through a democratic process
of convincing people motivating people
and ultimately passing legislation to
make the transition
to being a much more plant-based society
or shall we say a society at least
dominated by
vegan values it's very easy to give into
this fantasy
that the damage done to your health
by eating meat drinking dairy and so on
the damage done to your health will be
proven to be so extreme
that this will motivate a rapid
transformation of our society
from bottom to top without that kind of
democratic process
without even really the kind of process
of persuasion and conversion
that would accompany the rise of a new
religion
in the history of the world and let's
face it what we're doing here in
veganism
it's much more it's much more closely
comparable
to the rise of a new religion than it is
comparable to
say the discovery that cigarettes cause
cancer but let's let's just pause for
one moment
about the supposedly overwhelming
findings about
uh the health effects of cigarettes
you know jeremy irons still smokes
cigarettes handsome actor jeremy irons
has smoked cigarettes his whole life
long
he is still smoking cigarettes now more
than
70 years old and he's still playing
roles
in which he takes his shirt off he shows
his bare
chest on camera
anyone can look at jeremy irons and say
hey it's possible
to smoke cigarettes and lead a long
reasonably healthy happy life it's
possible to smoke cigarettes and be hot
be attractive and let's face it when
most people talk about health
that's really what they care about is
being attractive to other human beings
but they really care about our
aesthetics
not the measurements of internal
medicine it's actually incredibly
difficult to motivate people
to quit smoking even though the health
findings for the difference between
being a smoker and a non-smoker
are overwhelming they are astonishing
the positive difference you can make in
your life by quitting smoking and
quitting alcohol
is astounding and yet that
transformation of our society
hasn't happened the reality is that the
evidence
for the health benefits of a vegan diet
it's not astounding
it's not impressive that way the
discoveries of modern medical science
are not going to do
our work for us whether you think of the
future the vegan movement
more in terms of the pursuit of
political change
or as an ethical movement that really in
some ways
resembles a religion because you're
asking people to make a commitment
to doing the right thing just because
it's the right thing to do and i'd point
out that you know the health problems
caused by meat and dairy
they actually can't be ascribed to honey
they can't be ascribed to wearing a wool
sweater right the ethical argument for
veganism and the ecological argument for
veganism
it always has gone far beyond the health
argument and it always
will so how you respond to bad
news of this kind will reflect
or reveal what your underlying
assumptions about veganism
are this stands on a spectrum over on
the far
left end of the spectrum that you see on
screen here is the misconception
that veganism is worse for your health
that it's an ethical decision but a
personal sacrifice
closer to the middle of the spectrum
there's a small minority of persons like
myself
who make the argument that it is
possible to be a healthy vegan
therefore we have to deal with the
ethical and ecological problems
seriously a recent video uploaded to my
channel that is
in chinese but has subtitles in english
this is the core
of the argument is to say look in
ancient times
in medieval times people did not know
what was healthy and what wasn't people
really lived with the misconception that
they stopped eating meat or stopped
drinking dairy products
they might die now we don't have that
misconception we know for a fact that
it's possible
to be healthy as a vegan and that mere
possibility
profoundly changes the significance of
the ecological
and ethical problems we now have to ask
as i say there in chinese
so it is that an ethical problem becomes
a political
movement another step to the right is
the reasonable supposition
that veganism is healthier but only
slightly so
the health benefits you will experience
will most likely be
barely perceptible and not particularly
inspirational if you have two brothers
in the same family
and one's vegan and the other is not and
they have
similar lifestyle choices in terms of
going to the gym and what have you
you're not going to be looking at an
astounding
inspirational difference between the two
yes you can run some blood tests and
find some measurable difference between
these two
identical twins but that is not going to
inspire the transformation of western
civilization
that's not going to inspire the kind of
cultural change that a vegan like myself
sees
as profoundly rooted in an ethical
change in taking responsibility
for making the world a better place
doing your small part
but the discourse about veganism in the
year 2020
is dominated by fringe voices
on the right hand side of this spectrum
as i've drawn it
it's dominated by people like dr greger
and maddie limberner
who are claiming again and again that
veganism is
so much healthier that it's going to
inspire a revolution that there's going
to be some kind of rapid
social change without us doing the hard
work
without us having to convince people
that this
is the right thing to do and then
motivate them just to do the right thing
because it is the right thing to do look
again here at the the text i've got on
screen
yes the difference was equivalent to 10
fewer cases of ischemic heart disease in
vegetarians
um wow
wow even if
this difference were comparable
quantitatively to the improvement you
can make in your health
by quitting cigarettes the improvement
you can make in your health by quitting
alcohol
or the improvement you can make in your
health by quitting
cocaine fentanyl and heroin please stop
to think
about how little power those mirror
facts of medical science have
to transform our society and now start
thinking
seriously about what it is you can do
what it is
you have to do really to transform our
society
[Music]
if you want to know more positively
about what i think the approach
to vegan activism should be if you want
to know more about what i think about
the past
present and future of the vegan movement
there is a
playlists section of the channel more
than
five years of videos are organized there
under various headings
a good one to click on is the short list
on veganism
only 22 videos on that list so far
a whole lot to take in after i make a
video of this kind
i tend to get a whole lot of questions
the answer to which is
yup i've already made a video on it and
to be fair
a whole lot of people don't even realize
that there is a playlists
section a playlist tab that you can
click on
here on this youtube channel
[Music]